Adding GEP 957 for port matching support. (#966)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/geps/gep-957.md

# GEP-957: Destination Port Matching

* Issue: [#957](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/957)
* Status: Implementable

## TLDR

Add a new `port` field to ParentRef to support port matching in Routes.

## Goals

* Support port matching in routes based on the destination port number of the
  request.

## Non-Goals

* Support port matching based on port name.

## Introduction

Port matching is a common service mesh use case where traffic policies/rules
need to be applied to traffic to certain destination ports. For ingress, while
the API today already supports attaching a route to a specific listener, it may
be useful to support attaching routes to listener(s) on a specified port. This
allows route authors to apply networking behaviors on a fixed port.

## API

The proposal is to add a new field `Port` to `ParentRef`:

```go
type ParentRef struct {
  ...
  // Port is the network port this Route targets. It can be interpreted
  // differently based on the type of parent resource:
  //
  // Gateway: All listeners listening on the specified port that also support

>   // this kind of Route(and select this Route). It's not recommended to set
>   // `Port` unless the networking behaviors specified in a Route should only
>   // apply to a specific port as opposed to listener(s) whose port(s) may
>   // get switched by Gateway admins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // this kind of Route(and select this Route). It's not recommended to set
  // `Port` unless the networking behaviors specified in a Route must
  // apply to a specific port as opposed to a listener(s) whose port may
  // be changed.
```

# GEP-957: Destination Port Matching

* Issue: [#957](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/957)

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer: Implementable?

## TLDR

Add a new `port` field to ParentRef to support port matching in Routes.

## Goals

* Support port matching in routes based on the destination port number of the
  request.

## Non-Goals

> * Support port matching based on named port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support port matching based on port number.
```
Named port is ambiguous in this context (port names in k8s, section names, etc)

## Introduction

Port matching is a common service mesh use case where traffic policies/rules
need to be applied to traffic to certain destination ports. For ingress, while
the API today already supports attaching a route to a specific listener, it may
be useful to support attaching routes to listener(s) on a specified port. For
example, some users may only want to expose their application on ports 80 or 443

> on the Gateway.

Reviewer: > be useful to support attaching routes to listener(s) on a specified port

Why might that be useful?
Please elaborate on that for the purpose of this GEP.

80/443 is not the best example here probably. Readers are not imaginative so picking a better example will bring more clarity.

Author: Updated this section and also the field comment in API section to be more prescriptive. 

Admittedly while there are clear, concrete mesh use cases, it's only potentially useful for ingress(@robscott please chime in if I am missing a concrete ingress use case here). I am hoping that this GEP is a reasonable middle ground which enhances this API to be more inclusive towards use cases outside of ingress(such as mesh) while not making it more confusing/complicated for the existing ingress support.

## API

The proposal is to add a new field `Port` to `ParentRef`:

```go
type ParentRef struct {
  ...

>   // Port is the network port this resource targets. It can be interpreted

Reviewer: nit:
> Port is the network port this resource targets

What is `this`? Very ambiguous.

Author: Updated to "this Route"

  // differently based on the type of parent resource:
  //
  // Gateway: All listeners listening on the specified port that also support

>   // this kind of Route. It's only recommended to set `Port` when the networking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // this kind of Route (and select this Route). It's only recommended to set `Port` when the networking
```

  // behaviors specified in a Route should only apply to a specific port as
  // opposed to listener(s) whose port(s) may get switched by Gateway admins.
  // When both Port and SectionName are specified, the name and port of the
  // selected listener must match both specified values.
  //

>   // Implementations MAY choose to support other parent resources.
>   // If that is the case, they MUST clearly document how Port is
>   // interpreted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Implementations supporting other types of parent resources
  // MUST clearly document how/if Port is interpreted.
```

  //
  // When both Port and SectionName are unspecified, this will reference the

>   // entire resource.

Reviewer: Recommend leaving this out. Port field is a more specific matcher and should refrain from general behavior guidance.

  //

>   // For the purpose of status, an attachment is considered successful as
>   // long as the parent resource accepts it partially. For example, Gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // For the purpose of status, an attachment is considered successful if
  // at least one listener accepts the Route. For example, Gateway
```

Author: I wonder if we can phrase this in a way that is agnostic to the type of parent resource here while the example following this general statement is specifically about Gateway/Listener?

# GEP-957: Destination Port Matching

* Issue: [#957](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/957)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

> Support destination port matching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add a new `port` field to ParentRef to support port matching in Routes.
```

## Goals

> * Support destination port matching based on port number.

Reviewer 2: In the community meeting yesterday I think there was a bit of confusion around what destination port meant, this might be a bit clearer, but not sure:
```suggestion
* Support port matching in routes based on the destination port number of the request.
```

## Non-Goals

* Support port matching based on named port.

## Introduction

Port matching is a common service mesh use case where traffic policies/rules
need to be applied to traffic to certain destination ports. For ingress, while
the API today already supports attaching a route to a specific listener, it may
be useful to support attaching routes to listener(s) on a specified port. For
example, some users may only want to expose their application on ports 80 or 443
on the Gateway.

> ## API

Reviewer 2: Probably need a section in the GEP and/or godoc below describing the interaction between SectionName and Port. I'm not actually sure what the best approach is though.

We could say they were mutually exclusive, but that is likely unnecessarily restrictive. For ingress, one could say that they only wanted to attach to Gateway listener named foo if it was also listening on port 80. I'm assuming that wouldn't be super common, but it does seem fairly easy to interpret. For mesh, section name could represent some other implementation specific attribute such as a network name. In that case, it seems like specifying both network/sectionName and port could be quite helpful.

Given the potential usefulness, maybe we should suggest that these fields are complementary?

Author: Yeah, I don't have a strong opinion on this. Agreed that it may be better to make these fields complementary given that there is a reasonable interpretation on the meaning when both fields are present.

  //
  // Gateway: All listeners listening on the specified port that also support
  // this kind of Route.
  //
  // Implementations MAY choose to support other parent resources.
  // If that is the case, they MUST clearly document how Port is
  // interpreted.
  //
  // When unspecified, this will reference the entire resource.
  // For the purpose of status, an attachment is considered successful as
  // long as the parent resource accepts it partially. For example, Gateway
  // listeners can restrict which Routes can attach to them by Route kind,
  // namespace, or hostname. If 1 of 2 Gateway listeners accept attachment from
  // the referencing Route, the Route MUST be considered successfully
  // attached. If no Gateway listeners accept attachment from this Route, the
  // Route MUST be considered detached from the Gateway.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional
  Port *PortNumber `json:"port,omitempty"`
  ...
}
```

## Alternatives
### 1. Use SectionName in ParentRef for port matching
Port matching can be supported if SectionName accepts port numbers in addition
to listener names. This approach results in a less explicit API. It can also

> complicate the validation on SectionName.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a bit more detail here such as an example of how it would complicate SectionName validation and/or how this would provide a poor user experience.

  // If that is the case, they MUST clearly document how Port is
  // interpreted.
  //
  // When unspecified, this will reference the entire resource.
  // For the purpose of status, an attachment is considered successful as
  // long as the parent resource accepts it partially. For example, Gateway
  // listeners can restrict which Routes can attach to them by Route kind,
  // namespace, or hostname. If 1 of 2 Gateway listeners accept attachment from
  // the referencing Route, the Route MUST be considered successfully
  // attached. If no Gateway listeners accept attachment from this Route, the
  // Route MUST be considered detached from the Gateway.
  //
  // Support: Core
  //
  // +optional
  Port *PortNumber `json:"port,omitempty"`
  ...
}
```

## Alternatives
### 1. Use SectionName in ParentRef for port matching
Port matching can be supported if SectionName accepts port numbers in addition
to listener names. This approach results in a less explicit API for mesh use
cases. For example, it's less inituitive to create a route with
`ParentRef.SectionName` set to `443` to express `route all traffic whose
destination port is 443 to ...`. It also complicates the validation on

> SectionName in order to differentiate between a listener name and a port number.

Reviewer 3: IIUC the only reason that section name isn't sufficient is where the parent is some resource that is not a Gateway. It would be good to call that out here because it's pretty important IMHO.

Author: Rephrased this section. Please let me know if it is more clear now.
